FETAL CIRUCLATION
The fetal heart starts to beat right from the 4th week of intrauterine life.
The heart rate initially is around 65/min and raises to around 165/min just before birth.


		Fetal ciruculation - Anatomical consideration
Very less blood flows to the fetal lungs and liver.
Note that the function of the lungs is taken care by the placenta during the intrauterine life.
			How oxygenated blood reaches the tissues.
The umblical vein carries oxygenated blood from the placenta.
The oxygenated blood in the umblical vein bypasses the liver(passes through the ductus venous instead)and reaches the right atrium, then passes through the foramen ovale to the left atrium and then to the left ventricle.
This oxygenated blood from the left ventricle is pumped by the left ventricle to the tissues.
			What happens to the venous blood from the head and neck?
The blood from the head and neck reaches the right atrium via the superior vena cava (SVC).
This deoxygenated blood reaches the right ventricle,then gets pumped into the ductus arteriousus and mixes with the oxygenated blood the descending aorta.
			How blood reaches the placenta for oxygenation
Around 55% of blood from the descending aorta reaches the placenta for oxygenation.
Around 45% of blood reaches the tissues.

	Changes in fetal circulatory system at/after birth
			Changes in the pulmonary and systemic arterial resistances
The blood flow to the placenta drops and the systemic vascular resistance doubles (why? - reason to be found)
The increase in the systemic vasuclar resistance consequently increases the ventricular and aortic pressures.
Due to the expansion of the lungs the pulmonary vascular resistance falls greatly. (In the unexpanded lungs the pulmonary vasculature is compressed and once the lungs expands, the compression on the vasuclature is releived and thereby the resistance drops.Also the local hypoxia in the lungs causes vasoconstriction).
			Closure of foramen ovale
The diffrence in pressures between the right and left atrium closes the valve over the foramen ovale (the left atrial pressure is more than the right atrial pressure after birth).
Permananent closure of the foramen ovale occurs in due course.
			Closure of ductus arteriosus
- functional closure - constriction of the muscular wall of the ductus arteriosus after a few hours of birth (after birth blood begins to flow from the aorta towards the pulmonary artery, the increased oxygenation of the blood flowing through the ductus arteriosus is the primary cause of constriction).
- anatomical closure - fibrosis of the ductus arteriosus in 1 - 4 months time.
Failure of the closure of the ductus arteriosus leads to a congenital malformation called patent ductus arteriosus (PDA).
			Closure of ductus venosus
Immediately after birth the blood flow through the umblical veins ceases.
Within 1 to 3 hours the ductus venous closes. This forces the flow of blood into the liver sinuses (note that the liver gets very little supply of bloodduring the intrauterine life, the blood from the gut reaches the umblical vein, there is branch that is proximal to the ductus venous, which supplies the blood into/to the liver.).

